# ByteLevel BPE Scaling Experiments

This document describes the experiments conducted to analyze how ByteLevel BPE tokenization scales with different corpus sizes, vocabulary sizes, and split patterns. The goal is to understand the trade-offs between these factors and their impact on tokenization quality and efficiency.

However, the results obtained were quite poor compared to the baselines, given that I could not reach the optimal memory budget for training the tokenizers.

To run the experiments, we run the following command from the root directory of the repo:
```bash
uv run python -m scripts.benchmark.tokenizer_corpus_size \
    --seed 42 \ # for reproducibility
    --num-procs 16 \
    --vocab-sizes 20000,50000,100000 \
    --pat-strs gpt2,cl100k_base \
    --write-corpus \
    --corpus-sizes-mb 10,50,100,500,1000,5000,10000 
```

Args:
- `--seed`: Random seed for reproducibility. Default is 42.
- `--num-procs`: Number of processes to use for tokenizer training. Defaults to the number of CPU cores available, capped at 32 to avoid overloading the system.
- `--vocab-sizes`: Comma-separated list of vocabulary sizes to train tokenizers with.
- `--pat-strs`: Comma-separated list of pattern string names to use for tokenizer training. If not specified, defaults to using the GPT-2 pattern string.
- `--write-corpus`: Flag to indicate training mode (write corpus). If not set, the script will attempt to load an existing corpus from disk.
- `--corpus-sizes-mb`: Comma-separated list of corpus sizes in megabytes to use for tokenizer training. If not specified, defaults to a range of sizes based on the vocabulary size.
- `--compare-truncated-baselines`: Whether to compare trained tokenizers with truncated versions of baseline tokenizers.
- `--corpus-temperature-alpha`: Optional temperature parameter to control the randomness of the corpus generation. 

It allows us to train tokenizers with different configurations and evaluate them on a simple test set. The script is designed to be flexible and customizable, allowing us to easily add new sources for training data, new evaluation datasets, and new metrics for evaluating the tokenizers.

## Summary

Full recipe for training and scaling tokenizer with different corpus sizes, vocabulary sizes, patterns, 
and evaluating the trained tokenizers on a simple test set to analyze the trade-offs between:
- training corpus size, 
- vocabulary size, 
- split pattern,
- tokenization quality (compression ration, efficiency, etc.)
- and cross-language generalization (if we have multilingual evaluation sets).

The training data is generated by sampling from a mixture of sources, which can be customized by the user. 

By default, the training data is sampled from a mixture of the following sources ([gpt_lab.tokenizer.corpus](./../src/gpt_lab/tokenizer/corpus.py#L339)):
- English web text (from fineweb-edu)
- Multilingual web text (from fineweb-2)
- Maths text (from finemath-4plus)
- Python code (from codeparrot-clean)
To keep the same logic between the different runs, we create the training data once, store it on disk, and then use it for all the different runs. 
This also allows us to analyze the impact of the corpus size without having to worry about the randomness of the data generation process.

The evaluation is done on the following datasets (eval_configs in the code):
- enwik8 (for English text)
- fineweb-edu (for English web text)
- fineweb-2 (for multilingual web text, with subsets for different languages)
- finemath-4plus (for math text)
- github-top-code (for Python code)

> [!WARNING]
> With it current implementation, the script may use the same samples for both training and evaluation, 
which can lead to overfitting and an overestimation of the tokenizer's performance.
> However, the results obtained were quite poored compared to the baselines, given that I could not reach
the optimal memory budget for training the tokenizers. 
> Hence, in case of future runs with **exceptionally good results**, it would be important to check whether 
the training and evaluation samples are overlapping, and if so, to implement a proper train/eval 
split to get a more accurate estimate of the tokenizer's performance.

> [!NOTE]
> The code is designed to be flexible and customizable, allowing you to easily add new sources for
training data, new evaluation datasets, and new metrics for evaluating the tokenizers.


There is similar study on studying the optimal corpus size for training a BPE tokenizer as:
- [1] in which they find that the returns diminish after 150GB of training data, for BPE tokenizers with 40,960, 64,000, 128,000, and 256,000 vocabulary sizes.

However, this study is focused on training a BPE tokenizer with a specific size. They conclude that over 150GB of training data, the performance improvements become marginal, 
suggesting that there is an optimal corpus size for training BPE tokenizers.

Here, we want to analyze the trade-offs between corpus size, vocabulary size, and split pattern, 
Then, we also compare with truncated versions of baseline tokenizers to see how much of the performance can be retained with a smaller vocabulary size.

This is mainly motivated by the following facts:
- Language model have been scaled up but tokenizers sizes have not been scaled up as much, and it is not clear how much the tokenizer performance can be improved by scaling up the tokenizer training corpus and vocabulary size.
- According to [3], Language model performance is sensitive to tokenizer size, and the optimal size is often larger than the commonly used 50-100k tokens, especially for larger models. 

## Usage

How to run it from root directory of the repo:

options:
  -h, --help            show the help message and exit
  --seed SEED           
                        Random seed for reproducibility. Default is 42.
  --num-procs NUM_PROCS  
                        Number of processes to use for tokenizer training. Defaults to the number of CPU cores available, capped at 32 to avoid overloading the system.
  --vocab-sizes VOCAB_SIZES 
                        Comma-separated list of vocabulary sizes to train tokenizers with.
  --pat-strs PAT_STRS   
                        Comma-separated list of pattern string names to use for tokenizer training. If not specified, defaults to using the GPT-2 pattern string.
  --write-corpus        
                        Flag to indicate training mode (write corpus). If not set, the script will attempt to load an existing corpus from disk.
  --corpus-sizes-mb CORPUS_SIZES_MB
                        Comma-separated list of corpus sizes in megabytes to use for tokenizer training. If not specified, defaults to a range of sizes based on the vocabulary size.
  --compare-truncated-baselines  
                        Whether to compare trained tokenizers with truncated versions of baseline tokenizers.
  --corpus-temperature-alpha CORPUS_TEMPERATURE_ALPHA
                        Optional temperature parameter to control the randomness of the corpus generation. Higher values will result in a more diverse corpus, while lower values will make it
                        more focused on the most common samples. This can be useful for testing how the tokenizer performs with different levels of corpus diversity.
  --resume              
                        Whether to resume from existing results file. If set, the script will attempt to load existing results from the specified results path and continue from there,
                        skipping any experiments that have already been completed. This can be useful for long-running experiments that may be interrupted or for iteratively adding new
                        configurations without re-running everything.
  --results-path RESULTS_PATH
                        Path to store the results of the tokenizer evaluations. Default to './.gpt_lab/tokenizers/scaling_tokenizer_results.pkl'. If a file already exists at this path, it
                        will be renamed with a number suffix to avoid overwriting previous results.

- Make a new scaling run with new corpus sizes:

## Aknowledgements:

This experiment is inspired by and has some code adapted from the following sources:
- The Hugging Face Tokenizers library (https://github.com/huggingface/tokenizers)
- The OpenAI tiktoken library (https://github.com/openai/tiktoken)
- nanochat tokenizer code (https://github.com/karpathy/nanochat) for the idea of using HF-training backend + tiktoken-inference backend for efficient training and evaluation of tokenizers.

## References:
1. Reddy, Varshini, et al. "How much is enough? the diminishing returns of tokenization training data." arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20273 (2025).
2. Zouhar, Vilém, et al. "Tokenization and the noiseless channel." Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2023.
3. Tao, Chaofan, et al. "Scaling laws with vocabulary: Larger models deserve larger vocabularies." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024): 114147-114179.
4. Karpathy, Andrej. "Let’s Build the GPT Tokenizer: A Complete Guide to Tokenization in LLMs. A text and code version of Karpathy’s famous tokenizer video." https://www.fast.ai/posts/2025-10-16-karpathy-tokenizers.html (2025).

## Contributing:
- If you want to contribute to this project, please feel free to open an issue or a pull request. Any contributions are welcome, whether it's fixing a bug, adding a new feature, or improving the documentation.

Author: Arthur Testard (arthur.testard.pro@gmail.com) \
Please cite this work if the code is helpful to you.